What are, in your opinion, the
main milestones in the development
of a startup, from the point of
view of the growth phases and, above
all, of the financing that should
go alongside those phases?
I think there must be a balance
between the natural growth
of the product and the financing
rounds.
I think if the funding grows too
fast you are creating a little
bubble effect, where you have probably
sold too much the project with
the value you are demonstrating and
if you are going to be able to...
Do you have any example of that?
Well, yes, there have been in
the United States a couple of apps
that I have met very closely,
Secret, which I liked a lot, which
was like an anonymous Twitter with
a component grew a lot, but the
funding grew even faster and
they made rounds where they
raised $40 million without
being justified and without being
the company ready to digest
them and broke the year.
What usually happens?
Like all the bubbles.
Because in principle having more
money't have to be a bad thing,
right?
No, but when that money gets
it, not anchored to real value
and solid pillars, but as an
excessive effect of perception
and sale of the project,
because in the end that has pernicious
consequences derived from
that excess by which the money
has been captured.
It is not anchored and then
it begins to invest money where
it should not, to grow very artificially.
Marketing is probably one of the
most dangerous demons of startups,
where with relatively
little money you can create
a very powerful use of artificiality.
By having money, because not,
we can grow without actually validating
the model, without actually
dealing with the application
and the tool.
It is just an example.
When there are a lot of resources and
you are not prepared to invest them
and manage them, because in the end
you are making a lot of mistakes.
In marketing, in team recruitment,
in the evolution of the strategy.
I think it is as dangerous not
to raise money and not to
have enough money as to be able
to run, as to raise too much money.
I have seen examples of both.
I think he has to be accompanied.
When you see it, it is very easy.
It is very easy.
Rounds are done very quickly,
very easily.
Investors are usually accompanied
when there is an obvious
balance between the price you
are putting on them and the value
you are creating.
We call what you say
a premature escalation.
It's when you really haven't validated
the model and you're doing
it almost artificially,
because you're growing in users
but don't retain it, the chance
rate is very high or you're not
monetizing it.
But of course, as you're growing
in users, the hype is huge.
But it is that today even retention
can be brought through marketing.
You can measure when a user has allowed
you to log in in a month and
place a Facebook ad to them in
30 days.
You can make fisting until retention.
Marketing is dangerous.
It's so sophisticated that you
can actually get packaging
or whatever behind marketing.
And if you don't do it well, if
you don't do it to accelerate a
product that's already accelerating
and is growing well, you're
eventually creating a core of potential
problems that usually
end up ending the project.
And I have seen it.
Unfortunately, when you are in this
world you see the things of success
as we have talked about before,
but also the failures that
are many more by rule of play.
So, all these things I have seen,
I am seeing them.
What would the phases be like
if we thought from birth?
Do you have an idea, you with a friend,
whatever, start to undertake?
What would these growth phases
be like, but from the point of
view of financing?
The first thing you do is maybe
put your money or ask for money from
close people, you start to grow.
We have said there must be a balance,
but how would that process be?
Who do you go to, I mean, how much
money, how long?
First you have to make a plan of how
much you need and what you will
do with that money.
When you ask for money, you have
to say what you will do with that money.
I would try to get enough money
for at least 18 months.
of the first.
First, at least for 18 months that
will give you time to iterate, to
iterate until you get a MVP.
And then I would go to that, we
enter 18 months until we get to
break even freedom or a growth
fund for maybe three or four years.
But I think
that sequence is very important.
That is, we start, the idea is
born, we make money for 18 months
to be able to iterate until
you get to product market fit, have
a minimum viable product, that
the market is showing you that people
want you, that you buy it,
that you are earning money, etc.
Do you raise money again?
You are raising money again with that
market fit, without your eye being wiped
out in valuations and there in that
second phase you are going to grow.
Are the channels worth
marketing?
It depends, for example, in the listed
run there was no need to face
that round and we came to break even
and the cash generated by the
company, finance and social growth.
And if not, because there are
more and more growth funds that
enter very late phases and where
the multiple is smaller, the risk
is also smaller and the amounts
needed are larger.
Then they go for checks of 10, 20,
30, 40, 50 million where they are
probably thinking of making a 30,
a 20, a 30X, the success they
call a 4, a 5X.
Yes, because the risk is much smaller,
they expect less and are already
entering a company that is fully
validated and what they have
to do is, with those 10 million,
turn it into a global
company.